This code challenge directly follows from the previous video.
In fact, this code challenge starts by basically copying and then extending what we did in the previous
video to explore what happens when we manipulate the attention heads across all the layers of the model,
whether it matters which tokens we ablate and whether it matters if we set the attention head value
to zero or some other value.
So there's a lot to do here.
Let's get started.
A lot of exercise.
One can be solved by copying and pasting code from the previous video.
The biggest change is to the hook function.
In the previous video, I hardcoded the function so that it would only hook into exactly one layer.
Now here in exercise one, you want to hook into every layer and be able to specify which layer you
want to manipulate, not only which head.
So to be clear, you want to be able to manipulate any head in any layer.
That's one change from the previous video.
Another change is that you want to be able to choose whether to replace the activations in a given head
with all zeros, or the average activation value in that head.
So you will need another variable to toggle that choice.
The third change from the previous video is that you want to calculate the average activation, and
store that as a variable that we can analyze later.
Okay.
So just to make sure this is really clear, in the previous video I hardcoded the hook function to replace
a given head activation with zeros.
And what you are going to do here is first calculate the actual average of the activations in a given
head in a given layer.
That's done before you do any manipulations.
And then you store that average value in a variable.
And depending on the state of this toggle, you would then replace the attention head with zeros or
with that average value.
Now, because all of this is done inside a function, any variables you create inside this function
only live inside the function and are deleted once that function finishes running.
And that is because functions have local scope.
So to be able to access the average from outside the function, you need to define the variable as a
global variable before the function is called.
So if you're not sure how to do that, then don't worry about that part of the exercise.
You can just watch me introduce that idea when I switch to code.
The final thing to do in exercise one is to prepare and tokenize the exact same text with the exact
same target and non-target tokens that we used in the previous video.
Okay, so now you should pause the video and now I will switch to code and discuss my solution.
Here are all the libraries that we will need for all of the exercises in this code challenge.
And now here we get to exercise one.
So load in a model push it to the GPU and some variables.
Let me see where are we.
Here we are.
Here's these variables exactly as in the previous video.
And now here we get to this hook function.
Now in the previous video I did not have this outer hook where we get to specify or provide an input
of the layer Number.
Instead, I just had this function and yeah, then that was only implanted into one layer.
So here this part looks the same.
We are implanting this hook into C proj, and is a pre hook that will allow us to access the individual
attention heads when they are concatenated, but before they are mixed together.
And here you see that I am importing that hook function into all of the layers of the model.
Okay, so now this hook function is somewhat similar to the hook function in the previous video, but
quite a few new things in here.
First of all, I have this statement here where I am actually commenting out.
But if you would uncomment this, then this is just going to print out the length of this input, the
type of the input.
So this is a tuple.
By default this is only going to contain one element.
It can contain other elements depending on what kinds of inputs you provide into the model in the forward
pass.
But usually, at least certainly for our purposes here, this will be a one element tuple.
And then here you can print out the shape.
And the shape of that is sequences in the batch by tokens by embeddings dimension.
But the embeddings dimension is actually all of the attention heads concatenated together.
And that you will see with this if you leave that code Uncommented when you define and implant those
hooks.
Okay.
So then here I'm saying only modify this layer if this layer that we are currently hooking into in the
forward pass equals this other variable here layer to ablate, I have not yet defined this variable.
I'm going to define it later on before I do a forward pass.
Basically, this is the way to allow us to modify only one layer while putting the hook into all of
the layers.
Okay, so if this statement is true, that means that we are working with the layer that we want to
manipulate.
Then yeah, this is just some convenient reshaping so we can index the heads a little more easily.
This you've seen before.
Here's the other toggle.
So again a variable that does not yet exist I will define this later before actually running this function.
And I say if replace zero equals true then uh the value to replace is zero.
And that gets replaced over here.
And this line of code you've also seen exactly before in the previous video in that code demo.
Okay.
Now if replace with zeros is not true, then what we are going to do is replace that value instead of
being zeros it's going to be the head tensor.
So this variable up here, all of these sequences.
We're only going to have one sequence here.
All of the tokens in that sequence, only this specific head and all of the dimensions.
Remember this is 64 here.
This is not 768 for GPT two small.
And then we want the average of all of those values okay.
And then I'm defining a global variable called observed head mean.
And setting that to be equal to this value here, which is the mean of the attention head activation
values.
When I define it as a global variable here, that means that this will be available.
We can read this variable from outside the function.
That's going to be useful for later.
By the way, there are several other ways that you could have solved this.
For example, you can create a dictionary outside of this hook.
You can create a dictionary.
I'll just call it D for now.
And then once that dictionary is defined in the global workspace.
You can then say something like D uh, you know.
And then, uh, yeah, you would want this to be like this, something that would tell us the layer
and also the head that we are working with.
So that would also be a solution.
Uh, I have actually done things like that before, but I chose to do it this way.
Define it explicitly as a global variable just for some variety.
Okay, again, here is some confirmation of the layer and the head that we are manipulating.
Actually, this is what you could copy paste into the name of the key for the dictionary if you wanted
to use that to store the average head value.
Uh, and again, yeah, I'm just commenting this out.
These are the kinds of print statements that I encourage you to include in your code when you are developing
and working through and debugging your code.
Okay.
And then this stuff you've seen before as well.
So run that function.
Hook it into the model.
Here I get the tokens.
Berlin is the capital of blank.
And of course, we want to know what the model thinks is the Berlin is the capital of.
Okay, so this is all just literally copy pasted from the previous video.
Now for exercise two.
The goal of exercise two is to have a clean set of softmax outputs from the model without any manipulations.
This is very similar to what you saw in the previous video, except here.
Now in exercise two I want you to work with softmax.
So in the previous video I did all the analyses, all the visualizations as log softmax.
And here in this video we're going to use softmax.
So without the log.
For reasons that I will explain when I switch to code and when I write percent softmax over here.
I just mean to multiply the softmax probability values by 100 so that we get values between 0 and 100
instead of between 0 and 1.
Okay, now that said, you can see that this plot actually shows logsoftmax.
So I do want you to take the log transform.
But that's just for this visualization.
As you know from the previous video, these two data points here are important because they will be
the comparison reference values for the experiments that you will run in the next several exercises.
Okey dokey.
Now you should pause the video and code away and I'll discuss my solution and also why I prefer us to
work with softmax in this video instead of logsoftmax.
To get clean outputs from the model, I am creating these two variables, which I showed you in the
previous exercise.
In the hook function, I'm setting them to be values that are way higher than any layer that we have
or head that we have.
And this means that, yeah, that nothing is going to happen when we do the forward pass.
So just to make sure that is clear, when I set the layer number to be a thousand, then this is false.
And so none of the rest of this stuff ever gets run.
Looking at this code now, I suppose it actually would make sense to say like this.
And then also add another.
And if the head to ablate is less than or, you know, it should be, uh, in the range of zero to the
number of heads, this is probably a little bit safer.
But anyway that's fine.
Okay.
So let's see.
So this means that nothing is going to happen.
We're not going to do any manipulations to the model here.
I'm getting the output logits for the first sequence.
There's only one sequence the final target.
That's the final token.
That's the one we want to analyze.
And all of the vocab elements for the logits.
Then I'm converting them to softmax, not logsoftmax.
That's what I did.
Oops.
Like this.
That's what I did in the previous video.
But here I just want to focus on softmax and then multiply by 100.
Okay, now for the plotting.
Uh, we do actually want the logsoftmax.
And why do we want the logsoftmax just because I said so in the, uh, instructions.
But just make sure that you are dividing by 100 here because I multiply by 100 here.
Okay.
So really, the only point of doing, uh, this visualization here is just to make sure that everything
still works, just like in the previous video, we can plot this again using the, uh, just the softmax
values.
And here you see that the numbers are basically just a little bit more extreme.
Okay.
These values are negative here.
Okay, I have to I forgot I need to remove the log from all of this and also remove the division by
100 from all of this.
Okay, so now you see what it looks like.
Just 4% softmax.
Now, the difference here is that when you just look at the softmax and not the log softmax, the largest
values really, really pop out of the distribution.
That means that if you have subtle effects in your experiments with softmax, it's just a little bit
easier to visualize, because the large values really pop out from the rest of the distribution.
And the effects that we are going to observe in this video are not that great, right?
We're doing really subtle, specific targeted manipulations to the model.
And so therefore the effect sizes are not going to be huge.
And so I decided that we will run this experiment with probabilities instead of log probabilities.
That's just a choice.
If you do not like that, then that's great.
You're free to disagree with me and you can do the whole exercises with logs instead of the raw probability
values.
And now for exercise three.
Here you will start doing analyses and visualizations.
You need to set up a double for loop to loop over all of the transformer blocks.
So all the layers and all of the heads within each transformer block.
And then for each iteration of that double for loop, you run the forward pass, collect the softmax
probabilities of the final model output for the target and non-target tokens.
So space Germany and space France and also get the attention head averages.
I recommend storing all of the results in a three dimensional matrix where the dimensions would correspond
to the layer, the head within each layer, and the particular result that you store.
Once that double for loop finishes, you can visualize the results as the difference in the softmax
probability between the manipulation and the clean version.
In heatmaps that look like this.
So we have layer index on the x axis and head index on the y axis.
And the color in this image is the percent softmax of the target logit in the manipulated run minus
the target logit from the clean run.
Okay.
So this is for the target run.
And then here on the right this is for the non-target word.
This is the word France.
So that is one analysis to show what you also need to store from each iteration.
In the double for loop is the actual token that had the highest logit output.
Of course, you know that the correct answer that the model should give is Germany.
And in fact, that turns out to be Germany in all of these cases.
But you will see in later exercises that you'll get some different tokens in here as well.
By the way, where does this number 144 come from?
Make sure you understand why there are 144 runs.
I will discuss the answer when I show my code.
So that's it for exercise three.
I hope you find this one interesting.
It's also going to set us up for the next several exercises.
Anyway, now I will switch to code.
Here I'm making sure that this toggle replaced with zeros is still set to true.
Here is where I'm going to store all of my results.
I call this variable results zero because I'm going to be zeroing out the heads.
You'll see that contrasting with the variable that I'll define in a later exercise, where we will store
the means or replace with the means instead of the zeros.
Okay.
So that is going to be layers by heads by three.
And three corresponds to the three kinds of results that I want to save from this analysis, which I
will get to in a moment.
Okay, so here's our double for loop to run the experiment, looping over all of the layers and then
looping over all of the heads within each layer.
And I'm using this function tqdm to give a little progress bar at the bottom, although I don't really
need that.
This actually goes pretty quick.
But anyway.
Okay so here I do a forward pass.
Now in this forward pass these variables here layer to ablate and head to ablate.
Those are variables that are defined here in the for loop.
And they will be used inside the hook function Him over here to figure out which head to set to zero,
and over here to determine which layer to manipulate.
Okay.
So let's see okay so there's the forward pass here I do softmax again.
This is exactly the same code as what I showed in the previous exercise okay.
So now I'm storing the results.
And what are we storing.
First is the softmax for the target the softmax for the non-target.
And then the argmax of the softmax which is the logit that has the largest value.
And then later on we can convert this into a token to see what the text looks like.
Okay.
So now I run all of that code and we get an error because I haven't run this cell yet okay.
Very good.
Yeah.
You can see this goes super fast.
I actually first wrote this code, uh, testing it on the CPU, and then it took a little bit longer
on the CPU.
So that's why I decided to include this update progress bar.
But then I switched to running it on the GPU.
And yeah, now it runs really fast anyway.
Okay, so here we show the images.
So this is uh, I am show so image show here I'm showing the results for zero.
This is the softmax probability for the target minus the softmax probability from the target, but from
the clean version of the model okay.
So this is for zero.
And this is for one which means that this was for the target or the word Germany should be the correct
answer.
And here is for one this was the non-target that was for France.
And here you see what those images look like.
So a value of zero would mean that zeroing out or ablating or nullifying whatever term you want to use
one particular head in one particular layer has no impact on the final token, logit.
That's what a value of zero would mean relative to the clean version of the model when we didn't do
any manipulations.
If the number is positive here, then that would mean that zeroing out the attention head actually increased
the logit and a negative value here, which would mean colors more towards the purple end of the spectrum,
would mean that we actually decreased the, uh, the probability of selecting the token for Germany.
So again, for the targets and the non-targets, it is quite clear when you put them on the same color
scale that, uh, yeah, we didn't really have much of an impact on the non-target word.
There is some impact here and there, but not much, uh, versus for the target word.
And there it's, uh, much stronger.
So it's really into multiple percent difference in softmax probability.
Now you can see that sometimes it's increasing and sometimes it is decreasing the probability and it
doesn't look like there's any obvious patterns, like for example, going from positive to negative
as we go through the layers.
So we are going to look at histograms of this distribution in a later exercise.
So you don't have to worry about that now.
But for now you can just notice that it's interesting that there's quite a bit of variability in terms
of giving a positive or a negative impact on the final softmax probability.
Okay.
One other thing I would like to mention is that remember that these heads have no intrinsic ordering
to them.
There's no like spatial orientation organization inside the model such that heads four and five are
closer to each other than are like four and eight.
So the numbers are just arbitrary.
The indices are arbitrary.
There's no meaningful spatial relationship down the y axis here.
Okay.
Anyway, the Anyway, the last thing I'm going to do here is find the unique elements in the third element
in this matrix.
And remember that is the maximum token that was predicted for the token after the word of at the end
of the token sequence.
Okay.
So getting all of the unique values and just printing them out.
And then we see interestingly, most of the time it was Germany.
And here we got one out of 144 to be the token for space.
The okay so let me first say why this is 144.
There are 12 layers and there are 12 heads.
And we have a double for loop over all of them.
So that's 144.
Okay.
Now for the word the if we go back and look at this sentence, uh, where is it here.
So Berlin is the capital of Germany, but is it so weird to have the in here like this?
Probably not.
That could be.
B Berlin is the capital of the country.
Germany, for example.
So the is not the expected word that we would think should be there, but it's also not completely off.
It's not like Berlin is the capital of watermelon or, you know, something just totally off the wall
like that.
Okay, so interestingly, you can see that, yeah, these models still exhibit some stochasticity,
even though we are not doing probabilistic token selection here.
Exercise four is nearly identical to exercise three.
The difference is that here you will switch the toggle so that you replace each head activation with
the average of that head instead of ablating it to a value of zero.
But there is one more thing to do here in exercise four.
The second plot for this exercise is to show the actual head averages.
Bridges.
This is the variable that you defined as a global variable in the hook function.
So you're going to get one average per head per layer.
So then you can visualize them as a scatter plot linearized.
So here the x axis is heads by layers.
So there's 144 of them here.
And you can also visualize them as an image similar to the images from the previous figure.
And what you want to look for in particular is whether there seem to be any trends in the averages.
For example, if the average values in the head increases as we go deeper into the model, that kind
of result would suggest that there is like a drift in the distribution as we go deeper into the model.
Anyway, I'm not telling you that that's what's going to happen.
That's just the kind of pattern that you could look for.
All right.
You know what to do.
And now I will switch to code.
So here I'm switching the toggle to have this variable replace with zeros equal false.
And now you can see I have this variable result mean instead of results zero.
This is now four elements in the final dimension.
Whereas results zero from exercise three had three elements in the final dimension.
And the new piece of information that we are observing here is the empirically observed mean in the
head.
So the average of all the activation values within that head that we are then using to replace with
the all the values of the head instead of zero.
Okay.
Otherwise all of this code is exactly the same as the code for exercise three.
So just this line is different.
And of course this is now three instead of having a value of two okay.
So here again we see the results.
Now qualitatively at first pass inspection these look really really similar to the results from exercise
three.
Again, I'm not claiming yet that it doesn't matter whether you replace the head with zero or with the
observed mean.
All I'm saying is that at a very first pass glance, this looks really similar to what we saw in the
previous exercise.
Okay.
And here again we see almost all the time the model actually did select the word Germany and only once
did it select the token the.
So if you want you could find out which that which one that is that's you know one of these presumably
it's one of these dark purple, uh, head layer combinations over here.
Because that would mean that the softmax probability for Germany went down.
And then that would allow the softmax probability for the word the to increase.
Okay.
And then here I'm showing the head averaged activations.
So these are the actual values of the heads that were measured before I replaced them with these actual
values, and they appear to be roughly normally distributed in the sense that there's a lot of values
close to zero.
And the further we get from zero, the fewer data points there are.
Also, these are very small numbers.
And here you see as an image, there does not appear to be at least you know by first pass visual inspection,
it doesn't really look like there's any at least any obvious consistent patterns.
As we go deeper into the model, for example, it's not going from like yellow columns to purple columns
or vice versa.
So it kind of seems like it's just all over the place.
Maybe the variability is a little bit higher earlier in the model.
So the colors are a little bit more differentiated here, but nothing pops out as being super visually
obvious.